so have you already made plans for your
summer vacation well apparently there's
an ever so slight chance that you won't
be able to live them out wild rumors on
the internet and elsewhere have it that
the world might cease to exist at
literally any moment and the Yellowstone
supervolcano may be to blame oh boy sure
sounds scary but hey let's check the
facts first Yellowstone National Park in
Wyoming USA is America's very first
National Park you might also know that
Yellowstone sits on top of a giant
supervolcano that's part of the reason
the park can boast it's amazing geysers
and hot springs but at the same time
underneath Yellowstone there's an
enormous chamber full of hot liquid rock
called magma in 2015 researchers from
the University of Utah found that this
chamber is much bigger than previously
thought
they found one more reservoir with magma
under the top one the more spacious the
Chamber's are the more magma they
contain together the two reservoirs
contain a glob of magma which is 44
miles wide 30 miles long and 12 miles
deep in fact all this magma could easily
fill the Grand Canyon not once but 11
times now some people are worried that
the magma chambers are pushing against
the ground above them
this causes the land to rise
approximately 3 inches a year according
to scientific estimates the level of the
ground over the volcano increased by
about one foot between 2004 and 2011 so
doesn't that mean something isn't going
as it's supposed to well don't start
shouting doomsday just yet the
Yellowstone Volcano Observatory states
that this process either stopped or
seriously slowed down in 2015 and since
then nothing too exciting has been going
on with a volcano
besides experts say that the ground
rising and falling is how the
Yellowstone supervolcano breathes it
just moves up and down without erupting
also Yellowstone does have the status of
an active volcano and it's volcanic
explosivity index is 8 out of 10
it's a high number for sure but it
doesn't mean that if this volcano erupts
it'll be an apocalyptic event and well
they say that more than 1,000 bison have
recently left the Park Yellowstone
management doesn't connect this fact
with any potential danger hey maybe the
grass is greener elsewhere let's also
not forget that Yellowstone's
last major volcanic eruption was nearly
700 thousand years ago long before
humankind appeared but just for
curiosity's sake let's have a look at
what would happen if the Yellowstone
supervolcano erupts would it be the end
of the world or a more localized natural
disaster well here's the worst-case
scenario right before the eruption the
ground around the National Park would
lift geothermal pools and geysers would
heat up to superheated temperatures well
above its current 205 degrees fahrenheit
in addition they get even more acidic
than usual
magma would start to rise to the surface
in one moment the roof rock of the magma
chambers wouldn't be able to resist
anymore and the eruption would kick off
a massive column of lava and ash could
explode upward to a height of over 16
miles after that it'd keep pumping ash
for days on end such a mixture of lava
ash and gas would be hotter than 1,800
degrees Fahrenheit moreover it would
move at the speed of around 300 miles
per hour the air near the center of the
eruption would heat up to nearly 600
degrees yet the most treacherous
consequence of the supervolcano eruption
would be the ash fall out be sure to get
your umbrellas out and put on your gas
masks if you inhaled this substance it
would turn into a glassy cement in your
lungs in a matter of seconds you can
probably imagine how bad
the outcome could be and since ash is a
dense substance buildings would
eventually start to collapse under its
weight it would take just days until a
ten-foot layer of ash covered an area of
about 50 miles around the center of the
eruption Salt Lake City in the
neighboring areas would receive three
and a half feet of ash a thin layer of
ash would also blanket Los Angeles San
Francisco Chicago and even farther
cities like New York Miami in Toronto
the ash would make water unsafe to drink
vehicles would break down for some time
there would be no flights to or from
North America and for once no long lines
at airport TSA security once the ash
reached the stratosphere temperatures in
parts of the world would drop especially
if the eruption were very rich and
sulfur since this substance is
effectively a Sun blocker temperatures
would drop so low that there would be no
summer in some parts of the world for
the next several years the monsoon
seasons would change agriculture would
have serious problems which would create
disruptions in food supplies the Federal
Emergency Management Agency FEMA has
estimated that the potential damage
would be above three trillion dollars in
the US alone but hey take a breath this
is the worst case scenario and according
to the scientists from the Yellowstone
Volcano Observatory it's very unlikely
to happen they're sure that based on
their research and observations if an
eruption did occur it wouldn't be very
explosive its most probable outcome
would just be your typical lava flow
there have already been three super
eruptions in the history of Yellowstone
but they happen 2.1 million years ago
1.3 million years ago and 640 thousand
years ago the latest one got the name
the lava Creek eruption it created the
Yellowstone Caldera
and ejected a staggering 240 cubic miles
of rock dust and volcanic ash into the
sky
well that sounds pretty impressive even
though there haven't been any major
volcanic eruptions at Yellowstone
since anyway even if a super eruption
was imminent scientists may have found
the solution that would help humankind
get out of danger NASA researchers have
suggested a seemingly logical plan to
just cool down the Yellowstone
supervolcano the thinking behind this is
that the volcano leaks out only 70
percent of the heat from its magma
filled chambers the rest of the heat
stays inside as soon as the heat reaches
a particular threshold the volcano will
erupt that's why if it was possible to
extract even 35% of the heat from the
Yellowstone volcano the eruption could
be avoided magma gets thicker and
stickier when it's in a cooler state
once it loses this fluidity it'll stop
trying to get out to the surface one of
the ways to cool down the supervolcano
would be to add more water to its
insides unfortunately that's next to
impossible first of all it's incredibly
expensive and difficult to build an
aqueduct in the mountainous area it
would also lead to huge water
expenditures then NASA scientists came
up with a different plan they suggested
drilling a six mile deep well and
pumping down cold pressurized water the
temperature of the water that would
return would be approximately 600
degrees Fahrenheit this way the heat
would gradually be extracted from the
volcano and if a geothermal plant were
built on the site it would be able to
generate electric power thanks to the
simplicity of its production this
electric power would have an amazing
price of 10 cents per kilowatt hour
unfortunately this plan has a number of
drawbacks first the deepest drill hole
on the planet is currently about 40
thousand feet deep that sounds deep
enough but this borehole is only nine
inches in diameter as you can imagine
for thousands of cubic miles of magma
it's nothing more than a pinprick there
also exists a risk of triggering the
eruption if people accidentally drilled
into the magma
and tried to cool the volcano from there
this could make the top of the chamber
much more fragile as a result it would
become more prone to breakage on top of
that it could cause the release of the
toxic gases that accumulate at the top
of the reservoir this danger might be
avoided if specialists started to drill
the lower side of the supervolcano for
example somewhere on the outskirts of
Yellowstone National Park in this way
the heat wouldn't be able to reach the
top chamber this approach sounds really
good until you learn one little detail
the duration of such a drilling project
would take thousands of years as in
16,000 years the problem is that by
using this method you can't cool the
volcano faster than a rate of 3 feet a
year on top of that scientists aren't
100% sure that the volcano will stay
cold for at least a hundred years after
they finished the project and last but
not least the job of cooling down the
Yellowstone supervolcano would cost 3.5
billion dollars that's a big price for
such a controversial project in any case
scientists believe that people don't
have to worry about a super eruption for
another hundred years or even longer
according to the United States
Geological Survey the yearly probability
of a massive eruption is one in 700,000
this probability is nearly the same as
that of a big asteroid crashing into
Earth another fun fact to consider
what's more there's no scientifically
proved evidence that any of these events
are likely to happen anytime soon if
ever and I'm very happy about that
aren't you do you believe that the
Yellowstone supervolcano will erupt in
the near future share your opinion in
the comment section below remember to
give this video a like let your friends
know everything about Yellowstone
supervolcano and hit the subscription
button to move to the bright side of
life
[Applause]
you